README.md, before:

# rcc-xcorr
A Python library to compute normalized 2D cross-correlation of images using GPU acceleration and python multiprocessing.

**Contents**
1. [Requirements](#requirements)
2. [Installation](#installation)
3. [Usage](#usage)
4. [Benchmarks](#benchmarks)
   * [Benchmarking CPU vs GPU](#benchmarking-cpu-vs-gpu)
   * [Benchmarking Multi GPU](#benchmarking-multi-gpu)
5. [Options](#options)
   * [normalize_input](#normalize_input)
   * [crop_output](#crop_output)
   * [use_gpu](#use_gpu)
   * [group_correlations](#group_correlations)
   * [num_workers](#num_workers)
   * [num_gpus](#num_gpus)
   * [override_eps](#override_eps)
   * [custom_eps](#custom_eps)
   * [disable_pbar](#disable_pbar)
6. [Tests](#tests)
   * [Test Cross Correlation (2D alignment)](#test_batch_xcorr)
   * [Test Cross Correlation (3D alignment)](#test_batch_xcorr_3dalign)

## Requirements
To accelerate correlations using GPU an NVIDIA GPU with CUDA 11.2+ libraries installed. 

The **rcc-xcorr** has been tested with Python 3.8

Additional requirements:
* numpy
* scipy
* tqdm
* cupy (optional)
* [GPUtil](https://github.com/anderskm/gputil) (optional)
* [concurrent.futures](https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.futures.html)
* perfplot (to run the benchmark scripts)
* tifffile (to run the test scripts)
* dill (to run the test scripts)
* matplotlib (to run the test scripts)

## Installation

Before installing `rcc-xcorr` please update `setuptools` and `pip`:

```bash
python -m pip install -U setuptools pip
```

By default, the `rcc-xcorr` tool is installed without GPU support using:

```bash
python -m pip install -e git+https://github.com/research-center-caesar/rcc-xcorr.git#egg=rcc-xcorr
```

In order to use the `rcc-xcorr` tool with GPU acceleration, the optional dependencies have to be installed too:

```bash
python -m pip install -e git+https://github.com/research-center-caesar/rcc-xcorr.git#egg=rcc-xcorr[with-gpu]
```

***Note:***  Read this [post](https://adamj.eu/tech/2019/03/11/pip-install-from-a-git-repository/) to understand 
why ``python -m pip`` is preferred over just ``pip``.


## Usage

The **rcc-xcorr** tool takes as input a list of correlations, an array of images and an array of templates. 
The correlation list is a list of pairs, the first one correspond to the `image_id` (the image index within the images array),
the second correspond to a `template_id` (the template index within the templates array).

###Example:
````python
from rcc_xcorr.xcorr import BatchXCorr

import cupy as cp
import multiprocessing as mp


images       :  [numpy 2d-array]
templates    :  [numpy 2d-array]
correlations : [[0 1]
                [0 2] 
                [1 3]
                [1 2]
                [0 4]
                [2 0]]

use_gpu = True
num_gpus = cp.cuda.runtime.getDeviceCount()
num_workers = 4 * num_gpus if use_gpu else mp.cpu_count()

batch_correlations = BatchXCorr.BatchXCorr(images, templates, correlations[:sample_size],
                                           crop_output=(0, 0), use_gpu=use_gpu,
                                           num_gpus=num_gpus, num_workers=num_workers,
                                           group_correlations=False)
print(f'[BATCH_XCORR] {batch_correlations.description()}')
coords, peaks = batch_correlations.execute_batch() 
````

***Note 1:*** The order in which the **correlations** appear in the array is the same order in which 
the correlation results are returned to the calling program.

***Note 2:*** The image coordinates (`coords`) of the correlation `peaks` are returned as  `(y, x)` pairs. 
The order follows the in memory representation of the `xcorr` image. The row-major ordering is C memory
representation obtained from [unravel_index](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.unravel_index.html).


The program assumes all given `image_id` and `template_id` are valid indices inside the `images`/`templates` array.

## Numpy FFT Backends

At the core of the cross-correlation module we make use of numpy to compute fft convolution operations. Numpy uses by default 'scipy' to perform fft operations but also supports the use of other fft backends.  The cross-correlation module will make use of the preferred user backend. The following is an example of setting an fft backend.

### Using rcc-xcorr with MKL FFT backend
````python
import scipy
from rcc_xcorr.xcorr import BatchXCorr
from mkl_fft import _scipy_fft_backend as mkl_fft

images       :  [numpy 2d-array]
templates    :  [numpy 2d-array]
correlations : [[0 1]
                [0 2] 
                [1 3]
                [1 2]]

scipy.fft.set_workers(8)
scipy.fft.set_global_backend(mkl_fft)

batch_correlations = BatchXCorr.BatchXCorr(images, templates, correlations,
                                           crop_output=(0, 0), use_gpu=False,
                                           num_gpus=num_gpus, group_correlations=True)
coords, peaks = batch_correlations.execute_batch() 
````

### Using rcc-xcorr with pyfftw backend
````python
import scipy
from rcc_xcorr.xcorr import BatchXCorr
from pyfftw import interfaces.scipy_fftpack as pyfftw_fft

images       :  [numpy 2d-array]
templates    :  [numpy 2d-array]
correlations : [[0 1]
                [0 2] 
                [1 3]
                [1 2]]

scipy.fft.set_workers(8)
scipy.fft.set_global_backend(pyfftw_fft)

batch_correlations = BatchXCorr.BatchXCorr(images, templates, correlations,
                                           crop_output=(0, 0), use_gpu=False,
                                           num_gpus=num_gpus, group_correlations=True)
coords, peaks = batch_correlations.execute_batch() 
````

## Benchmarks

The following are benchmarks showcasing the performance of the **rcc-xcorr* tool using different
configurations. The purpose is to illustrate how the input data and allocated computing resources
affect the **rcc-xcorr** performance.

### Benchmarking CPU vs GPU

The plot illustrates the **xcorr-tool** performance using CPU vs GPU and enabling grouping.
![performance using CPU vs GPU](rcc_xcorr/benchmark_xcorr.svg)

***Notes:*** The performance gain by enabling grouping is noticeable for a large number of correlations. 
Also notice that for a small number of correlations (***correlations > 30***) the CPU mode has better performance.

### Benchmarking Multi GPU

The plot illustrates the **xcorr-tool** performance using 1, 2, 3 or 4 GPU(s) devices.

![performance using multiple GPUs](rcc_xcorr/benchmark_xcorr_gpu_scaling.svg)

***Notes:*** The number of workers per gpu is a value dependent on the GPU at hand. The goal is to keep
the GPU always busy overlapping `host-to-device` copy operations using multiple worker processes
each of them streaming data to the GPU device in parallel.

## Options

The following options can be used to control the execution of the **rcc-xcorr** tool

### normalize_input 
***Syntax:*** `[normalize_input=True|False(default)]`

This option would take the mean and divide by the standard deviation of the `image`. 

### crop_output 
***Syntax:*** `[crop_output=(0, 0) (default)]`

Use this option to remove the border `(x_px, y_px)` pixels from the cross-correlation output.

### use_gpu 
***Syntax:*** `[use_gpu=True(default)|False]`

The **rcc-xcorr** tool supports a **CPU-ONLY** mode, which can be used in case the parallel computer system does not
count with a GPU. This also allows to have multiple instances of the **rcc-xcorr** tool running on a
given node. One of them using the GPU resources and a second one constrained only to use the CPU cores.

### group_correlations 
***Syntax:*** `[group_correlations=True|False(default)]`

This optimization can be used, in case the list of `correlations` contains multiple instances of correlations where an `image` is
compared against multiple `templates`.

In this option is enabled the **rcc-xcorr** tool first sort and group the `correlations` having the same `image`.
This optimization avoids duplicate transfer of data between the CPU and the GPU memory increasing the performance.

***NOTE:*** The final output preserves the order in which the `correlations` were originally entered.

### num_workers 
***Syntax:*** `[num_workers=4(default)]`

In case the `use_gpu` option is set to `True` the value used for `num_workers` should match the `num_gpus` value (`default=4`)
The workers are used in a round-robin fashion to dispatch individual `correlation` pairs to the device (GPU). 
In order to keep the GPU(s) working at their full capacity a sufficient amount of workers per GPU must be in place.
The amount of workers that would make GPU work at its full capacity depend on the GPU itself.
A rule of thumb is to use 3 workers per GPU device. 

***NOTE:*** Increasing the number of workers above the number for optimum performance will degrade the performance 
of the device due to context switching from the GPU scheduler.

### num_gpus 
***Syntax:*** `[num_gpus=TOTAL_SYSTEM_GPUS(default)]`

By default, the **rcc-xcorr** tool uses all the devices allocated by the job (all the devices available on the node). 
If the `num_gpus` is passed then the **rcc-xcorr** tool restricts itself to use the indicated number of devices 
at most. In case less devices are available then the value is used as an upper bound.

***NOTE:*** `allocated_devices=min(num_gpus, availabe_devices)`

### override_eps 
***Syntax:*** `[override_eps=True|False(default)]`

This flag is used to indicate the ***rcc-xcorr*** tool that a `custom_eps` value should be used instead.

### custom_eps 
***Syntax:*** `[custom_eps=1e-06(default)]`

This option is used together with the `override_eps` flag to adopt a custom eps value to obtain the mask used to avoid
zero divisions whenever small values are used in the denominator during the cross-correlation output normalization.

### disable_pbar 
***Syntax:*** `[disable_pbar=True|False(default)]`

This option is used to switch off the progress bar indicator.

## Tests

The correctness of the **rcc-xcorr** tool has been test against data created with 
[emalign](https://github.com/research-center-caesar/emalign). The test scripts are:

### Test Cross Correlation (2D alignment)
Test data consists of 925 correlations used during `emalign` 2D alignment.
[test_batch_xcorr.py](rcc_xcorr/test_batch_xcorr.py)

### Test Cross Correlation (3D alignment)
Test data consists of 2806 correlations used during `emalign` 3D alignment.
[test_batch_xcorr_3dalign.py](rcc_xcorr/test_batch_xcorr_3dalign.py)

Commit message:

Changing LICENSE to GPL v3. Added documentation about setting the fft_backend in CPU mode.

README.md, after:

# rcc-xcorr
A Python library to compute normalized 2D cross-correlation of images using GPU acceleration and python multiprocessing.

**Contents**
1. [Requirements](#requirements)
2. [Installation](#installation)
3. [Usage](#usage)
4. [Benchmarks](#benchmarks)
   * [Benchmarking CPU vs GPU](#benchmarking-cpu-vs-gpu)
   * [Benchmarking Multi GPU](#benchmarking-multi-gpu)
5. [Options](#options)
   * [normalize_input](#normalize_input)
   * [crop_output](#crop_output)
   * [use_gpu](#use_gpu)
   * [group_correlations](#group_correlations)
   * [num_workers](#num_workers)
   * [num_gpus](#num_gpus)
   * [override_eps](#override_eps)
   * [custom_eps](#custom_eps)
   * [disable_pbar](#disable_pbar)
6. [Tests](#tests)
   * [Test Cross Correlation (2D alignment)](#test_batch_xcorr)
   * [Test Cross Correlation (3D alignment)](#test_batch_xcorr_3dalign)

## Requirements
To accelerate correlations using GPU an NVIDIA GPU with CUDA 11.2+ libraries installed. 

The **rcc-xcorr** has been tested with Python 3.8

Additional requirements:
* numpy
* scipy
* tqdm
* cupy (optional)
* [GPUtil](https://github.com/anderskm/gputil) (optional)
* [concurrent.futures](https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.futures.html)
* perfplot (to run the benchmark scripts)
* tifffile (to run the test scripts)
* dill (to run the test scripts)
* matplotlib (to run the test scripts)

## Installation

Before installing `rcc-xcorr` please update `setuptools` and `pip`:

```bash
python -m pip install -U setuptools pip
```

By default, the `rcc-xcorr` tool is installed without GPU support using:

```bash
python -m pip install -e git+https://github.com/research-center-caesar/rcc-xcorr.git#egg=rcc-xcorr
```

In order to use the `rcc-xcorr` tool with GPU acceleration, the optional dependencies have to be installed too:

```bash
python -m pip install -e git+https://github.com/research-center-caesar/rcc-xcorr.git#egg=rcc-xcorr[with-gpu]
```

***Note:***  Read this [post](https://adamj.eu/tech/2019/03/11/pip-install-from-a-git-repository/) to understand 
why ``python -m pip`` is preferred over just ``pip``.


## Usage

The **rcc-xcorr** tool takes as input a list of correlations, an array of images and an array of templates. 
The correlation list is a list of pairs, the first one correspond to the `image_id` (the image index within the images array),
the second correspond to a `template_id` (the template index within the templates array).

###Example:
````python
from rcc_xcorr.xcorr import BatchXCorr

import cupy as cp
import multiprocessing as mp


images       :  [numpy 2d-array]
templates    :  [numpy 2d-array]
correlations : [[0 1]
                [0 2] 
                [1 3]
                [1 2]
                [0 4]
                [2 0]]

use_gpu = True
num_gpus = cp.cuda.runtime.getDeviceCount()
num_workers = 4 * num_gpus if use_gpu else mp.cpu_count()

batch_correlations = BatchXCorr.BatchXCorr(images, templates, correlations[:sample_size],
                                           crop_output=(0, 0), use_gpu=use_gpu,
                                           num_gpus=num_gpus, num_workers=num_workers,
                                           group_correlations=False)
print(f'[BATCH_XCORR] {batch_correlations.description()}')
coords, peaks = batch_correlations.execute_batch() 
````

***Note 1:*** The order in which the **correlations** appear in the array is the same order in which 
the correlation results are returned to the calling program.

***Note 2:*** The image coordinates (`coords`) of the correlation `peaks` are returned as  `(y, x)` pairs. 
The order follows the in memory representation of the `xcorr` image. The row-major ordering is C memory
representation obtained from [unravel_index](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.unravel_index.html).


The program assumes all given `image_id` and `template_id` are valid indices inside the `images`/`templates` array.

## Numpy FFT Backends

At the core of the cross-correlation module we make use of numpy to compute fft convolution operations. Numpy uses by default 'scipy' to perform fft operations but also supports the use of other fft backends.  The cross-correlation module will make use of the preferred user backend. The fft backend that has the best performance according to our benchmark is Intel's MKL.

![benchmark CPU fft backends](rcc_xcorr/benchmark_xcorr_cpu_fft_backends.svg)

The following two examples illustrate how to set the fft backend used by `rcc-xcorr` in CPU mode. First example uses `mkl_fft` and second `pyfftw`

### **Using rcc-xcorr with MKL FFT backend**

````python
import scipy
from rcc_xcorr.xcorr import BatchXCorr
from mkl_fft import _scipy_fft_backend as mkl_fft

images       :  [numpy 2d-array]
templates    :  [numpy 2d-array]
correlations : [[0 1]
                [0 2] 
                [1 3]
                [1 2]]

scipy.fft.set_workers(8)
scipy.fft.set_global_backend(mkl_fft)

batch_correlations = BatchXCorr.BatchXCorr(images, templates, correlations,
                                           crop_output=(0, 0), use_gpu=False,
                                           num_gpus=num_gpus, group_correlations=True)
coords, peaks = batch_correlations.execute_batch() 
````

### **Using rcc-xcorr with pyfftw backend**
````python
import scipy
from rcc_xcorr.xcorr import BatchXCorr
from pyfftw import interfaces.scipy_fftpack as pyfftw_fft

images       :  [numpy 2d-array]
templates    :  [numpy 2d-array]
correlations : [[0 1]
                [0 2] 
                [1 3]
                [1 2]]

scipy.fft.set_workers(8)
scipy.fft.set_global_backend(pyfftw_fft)

batch_correlations = BatchXCorr.BatchXCorr(images, templates, correlations,
                                           crop_output=(0, 0), use_gpu=False,
                                           num_gpus=num_gpus, group_correlations=True)
coords, peaks = batch_correlations.execute_batch() 
````

## Benchmarks

The following are benchmarks showcasing the performance of the **rcc-xcorr* tool using different
configurations. The purpose is to illustrate how the input data and allocated computing resources
affect the **rcc-xcorr** performance.

### Benchmarking CPU vs GPU

The plot illustrates the **xcorr-tool** performance using CPU vs GPU and enabling grouping.
![performance using CPU vs GPU](rcc_xcorr/benchmark_xcorr.svg)

***Notes:*** The performance gain by enabling grouping is noticeable for a large number of correlations. 
Also notice that for a small number of correlations (***correlations > 30***) the CPU mode has better performance.

### Benchmarking Multi GPU

The plot illustrates the **xcorr-tool** performance using 1, 2, 3 or 4 GPU(s) devices.

![performance using multiple GPUs](rcc_xcorr/benchmark_xcorr_gpu_scaling.svg)

***Notes:*** The number of workers per gpu is a value dependent on the GPU at hand. The goal is to keep
the GPU always busy overlapping `host-to-device` copy operations using multiple worker processes
each of them streaming data to the GPU device in parallel.

## Options

The following options can be used to control the execution of the **rcc-xcorr** tool

### normalize_input 
***Syntax:*** `[normalize_input=True|False(default)]`

This option would take the mean and divide by the standard deviation of the `image`. 

### crop_output 
***Syntax:*** `[crop_output=(0, 0) (default)]`

Use this option to remove the border `(x_px, y_px)` pixels from the cross-correlation output.

### use_gpu 
***Syntax:*** `[use_gpu=True(default)|False]`

The **rcc-xcorr** tool supports a **CPU-ONLY** mode, which can be used in case the parallel computer system does not
count with a GPU. This also allows to have multiple instances of the **rcc-xcorr** tool running on a
given node. One of them using the GPU resources and a second one constrained only to use the CPU cores.

### group_correlations 
***Syntax:*** `[group_correlations=True|False(default)]`

This optimization can be used, in case the list of `correlations` contains multiple instances of correlations where an `image` is
compared against multiple `templates`.

In this option is enabled the **rcc-xcorr** tool first sort and group the `correlations` having the same `image`.
This optimization avoids duplicate transfer of data between the CPU and the GPU memory increasing the performance.

***NOTE:*** The final output preserves the order in which the `correlations` were originally entered.

### num_workers 
***Syntax:*** `[num_workers=4(default)]`

In case the `use_gpu` option is set to `True` the value used for `num_workers` should match the `num_gpus` value (`default=4`)
The workers are used in a round-robin fashion to dispatch individual `correlation` pairs to the device (GPU). 
In order to keep the GPU(s) working at their full capacity a sufficient amount of workers per GPU must be in place.
The amount of workers that would make GPU work at its full capacity depend on the GPU itself.
A rule of thumb is to use 3 workers per GPU device. 

***NOTE:*** Increasing the number of workers above the number for optimum performance will degrade the performance 
of the device due to context switching from the GPU scheduler.

### num_gpus 
***Syntax:*** `[num_gpus=TOTAL_SYSTEM_GPUS(default)]`

By default, the **rcc-xcorr** tool uses all the devices allocated by the job (all the devices available on the node). 
If the `num_gpus` is passed then the **rcc-xcorr** tool restricts itself to use the indicated number of devices 
at most. In case less devices are available then the value is used as an upper bound.

***NOTE:*** `allocated_devices=min(num_gpus, availabe_devices)`

### override_eps 
***Syntax:*** `[override_eps=True|False(default)]`

This flag is used to indicate the ***rcc-xcorr*** tool that a `custom_eps` value should be used instead.

### custom_eps 
***Syntax:*** `[custom_eps=1e-06(default)]`

This option is used together with the `override_eps` flag to adopt a custom eps value to obtain the mask used to avoid
zero divisions whenever small values are used in the denominator during the cross-correlation output normalization.

### disable_pbar 
***Syntax:*** `[disable_pbar=True|False(default)]`

This option is used to switch off the progress bar indicator.

## Tests

The correctness of the **rcc-xcorr** tool has been test against data created with 
[emalign](https://github.com/research-center-caesar/emalign). The test scripts are:

### Test Cross Correlation (2D alignment)
Test data consists of 925 correlations used during `emalign` 2D alignment.
[test_batch_xcorr.py](rcc_xcorr/test_batch_xcorr.py)

### Test Cross Correlation (3D alignment)
Test data consists of 2806 correlations used during `emalign` 3D alignment.
[test_batch_xcorr_3dalign.py](rcc_xcorr/test_batch_xcorr_3dalign.py)
